HOW TO COMPILE AND INSTALL XAOS
===============================

For end users, this documentation is unnecessary. Compilation is
interesting for you only if

  * you are a packager of a Linux distribution,
  * you want to try new features which are not yet included in the
    available binary packages for your distribution,
  * you want to try some changes/enhancements on XaoS source code.
  
In other cases you are recommended to install a binary version using
your software installation tool (e.g. synaptic on Ubuntu/Debian
systems) or downloading a package from http://xaos.sf.net.


For Unix/X11
============

To compile XaoS you need optimizing ANSI compatible C compiler and 
the Xlib library.

To compile XaoS with image saving code you also need zlib and pnglib
installed. They are available at:

  * ftp://ftp.uu.net/graphics/png/src/zlib-0.95.tar.gz
  * ftp://ftp.uu.net/graphics/png/src/libpng-0.81.tar.gz

But, in general, both are available in your Unix version automatically.

AA-lib is a library alowing high quality ascii-art output from XaoS
available at AA-project homepage http://aa-project.sf.net. You need at
least version 1.4. (At the time of writing this documentation, 1.4rc2 is
out and final version of AA-lib is not released yet. 1.4rc2 works
properly.)

To use internationalization (i18n) you also need GNU gettext.

XaoS now have a configure script so the following should work correctly:

  CFLAGS=(your best size optimizing switches)
  CFLAGS1=(your best speed optimizing switches)
  export CFLAGS

  # Note that these two steps are not required on PC/Linux
  # and for all gcc compilers XaoS uses quite good switches.
  # But this is REQUIRED for other compilers, because XaoS
  # is coded to be a good target for optimizer and NEEDS to
  # be optimized to work in reasonable speed.

  ./configure [options --- usually not required]
  make
  make install

For better results please edit src/include/config/config.autoconf to
reflect your system. 

To enable experimental SMP support please use:

  --with-pthread=yes


For Win32
=========

(Edited by Andreas Madritsch, 2002-10-03, 2003-03-04, 2003-03-18; April
and May 2008.)

Features/requirements
---------------------

XaoS has fully featured support for Win32 and DirectX API. The Win32
driver should work on Windows 9x, Windows NT, Windows XP and even on
Windows 3.1 with win32s in all bit depths supported by Windows. It was
originally tested only on Windows 95 in 4, 8, 16, 24 and 32 bpp modes.
XaoS works well in all tested modes except the 16 color mode where it
uses Windows conversion routines and because they are slow and ugly,
XaoS is slow and ugly.

DirectX support is optional, so you don't need DirectX DLL libraries
installed on your system. The driver supports 8, 16, 24 and 32 bit
depths in fullscreen mode and 16, 24, 32 bit depths in windowed mode.
256 colors are not supported in windowed mode because of palette
mapping problems, so use win32 driver instead. In fullscreen mode press
'=' to change default resolution.

Compiling XaoS
--------------

To compile XaoS you need Cygwin, MinGW, the DirectX header files, zlib
and libpng.

Cygwin can be downloaded from http://www.cygwin.com/. It is recommended
to install at least all base and devel packages except the mingw-runtime
package, because MinGW support of Cygwin is incomplete, which causes
dependencies on cygwin1.dll.

MinGW can be downloaded from http://www.mingw.org/. Create a new
directory, copy the downloaded tar archive into that directory and
gunzip and untar the archive. Copy all the header files and
subdirectories contained in the extracted include/ directory to the
directory usr/include/mingw/ of your Cygwin installation. Copy all the
libraries and subdirectories in the extracted lib/ directory to the
directory lib/mingw/ of your cygwin installation. If one of the MinGW
directories does not exist, you have to create it. If there are already
files in one of the MinGW directories, that have the same name as files
you have to copy there, then overwrite these files.

The DirectX header files can be downloaded from
http://www.microsoft.com/downloads/. Extract the downloaded file and
copy all the header files located in the extracted include/ directory to
the directory usr/include/mingw/ of your Cygwin installation. If there
are already files there that have the same name as files, you have to
copy there, then overwrite them.

Zlib and libpng can be downloaded from http://sourceforge.net/. Simply
search for libpng. Zlib can be downloaded from the same web page as
libpng. Gunzip and untar zlib and libpng in the same directory. Rename
the extracted directories from zlib and libpng to zlib and libpng
respectively.

To compile and install zlib, change to the directory zlib/ and type

  ./configure --prefix=/usr/local --includedir=/usr/include/mingw
  --libdir=/lib/mingw

from the bash shell shipped with Cygwin (the above is one line, don't
break the line). Edit the just generated makefile and add the compiler
switch -mno-cygwin to the CFLAGS and LDFLAGS. I also had to remove the
minigzip testprogram from TEST_OBJS and the target all, because some
libraries were not found in my Cygwin installation. After saving the
changes to the makefile, type make in the bash shell. Install zlib by
typing make install.

To compile and install libpng, copy the file makefile.cygwin from the
subdirectory scripts/ of the directory libpng/ to the directory libpng/
and name it makefile. Edit the just copied and renamed makefile and put
the line MINGW=1 above the line ifdef MINGW. Uncomment the lines
#ZLIBLIB=../zlib and #ZLIBINC=../zlib and instead comment the lines
ZLIBLIB= /usr/lib and ZLIBINC=. It seems to be necessary to make a
symbolic link named lib in the directory usr/ of your Cygwin
installation which points to the lib/ directory of the Cygwin
installation by typing

  ln -s /usr/lib /lib

in the bash shell. After saving the changes to the makefile, change to
the directory libpng/ and type make. Copy the header files png.h and
pngconf.h located in the directory libpng/ to the directory
usr/include/mingw/ of your Cygwin installation. Copy the library
libpng.a also located in the directory libpng/ to the directory
lib/mingw/ of your cygwin installation.

Now change to the directory XaoS/ and type

  export CPPFLAGS=-I/usr/include/mingw
  export LDFLAGS=-L/lib/mingw
  ./configure --with-x11-driver=no --with-dga-driver=no --disable-nls

in the bash shell. The switches --with-x11-driver=no and
--with-dga-driver=no are needed if you have installed Cygwin with
XFree86 to prevent the configure script to try to build XaoS for X11.
The switch --disable-nls is needed because internationalization is not
yet implemented for the Windows native interface (see more information
on this later). Type make to build XaoS.

If you wish i18n support you have to download gettext from
http://www.mingw.org/ and libiconv from
http://www.mingw.org/download.shtml. Copy the header files libintl.h,
iconv.h and libcharset.h to the directory usr/include/mingw/ of your
Cygwin installation. Copy the libraries and libtool library files
charset.alias, libgettextlib.dll.a, libgettextlib.la,
libgettextsrc.dll.a, libgettextsrc.la, libintl.a, libintl.dll.a,
libintl.la, libcharset.a, libcharset.dll.a, libcharset.la,
libiconv.dll.a and libiconv.la to the directory lib/mingw/ of your
Cygwin installation. To compile XaoS with i18n support you omit the
switch --disable-nls when executing the configure script.

If you wish thread support you have to download libpthread from
ftp://sources.redhat.com/pub/pthreads-win32. Copy the header files
pthread.h, sched.h and semaphore.h to the directory usr/include/mingw/
of your Cygwin installation. Copy the library libpthreadGC.a to the
directory lib/mingw/ of your Cygwin installation and rename it to
libpthread.a. To compile XaoS with thread support you use the switch
--with-pthread=yes with the configure script.

To install XaoS please type

  export DESTDIR=<installdir>

in a bash shell, where <installdir> should be the absolute path of the
folder in which XaoS should be installed. Type make install-win to
install XaoS.

To build the XaoS installer, install XaoS to
XaoS/src/ui/ui-drv/win32/installer/XaoS. If you compiled XaoS with i18n
support, copy the libraries libiconv-2.dll and libintl-8.dll to
XaoS/src/ui/ui-drv/win32/installer/XaoS/bin. Download NSIS from
http://nsis.sourceforge.net/ and install it. Compile the script XaoS
Installer.nsi in the directory XaoS/src/ui/ui-drv/win32/installer.

XaoS was tested only on Intel platform, but it should work on alpha too.


Binary versions
===============

As mentioned above, you may also get a binary distribution. For more
information please browse the XaoS homepage
(http://sf.net/projects/xaos).
